[Music]
very good morning to you welcome to
breakfast with Dan Walker and Louise
Minchin it's exactly eight o'clock these
are your Wednesday morning headlines
arise Sir Tom captain Tom Moore is
awarded a knighthood after raising 40
million pounds for NHS charities we're
live here with Captain Sir Thomas Moore
sitting waiting to talk to you to tell
you exactly how he feels about receiving
a knighthood pressure grows on the
government as at least 11 English
councils say they have serious concerns
about the phased reopening of schools on
the 1st of June the jet engine
manufacturer rolls-royce has announced
this morning that it's cutting 9,000
jobs around the world about half of the
company's 52,000 employees work here in
the UK from today all adults in England
will be automatically be organ donors
unless they opt out 6 positive test for
Kovach 19 in the Premier League as clubs
return to team training that is less
than 1% of the total people tested
[Music]
good morning it's the 20th of May our
top story for you this morning the world
war two veteran captain Tom Moore you
just saw a little slice of him there and
his back garden is to be knighted for
his fundraising efforts for NHS
Charities this is after a special
nomination came from the prime minister
he walked a hundred laps of his garden
in time for his 100th birthday last
month and in the process raised almost
40 million pounds breakfast John McGuire
has more his story has been a ray of
light in these dark times with the
country and much of the world on
lockdown a family joke saw Tom Moore
who'd served as a captain in the Second
World War
pledged to walk 100 laps of his back
garden to celebrate his 100 years of
life his aim was to raise a thousand
pounds for NHS charities after he'd been
so well treated following the fall as
the steps increased his story spread
around the globe and his fundraising
total smashed targets into oblivion it's
amazing and what I love was no it's
wonderful that everyone kind of been
inspired by his story is determination
so you know I think he's a one-man
fundraising machine God knows what the I
don't think it's absolutely amazing did
my super Prince can say some things like
that the Great and the good lined up to
thank and pay tribute to him and many
called for a knighthood a suggestion he
met at the time with typical humility
and humor I think it was not to be Sir
Thomas More such a thing
[Applause]
[Music]
two weeks later with a number-one song
tens of thousands of birthday cards the
rank of honorary colonel and an historic
fly past he had raised a record-breaking
and breathtaking almost 33 million
pounds and with Gift Aid it reached 40
million today's knighthood comes after a
personal recommendation from the prime
minister whose statement reads on behalf
of everyone who's been moved by his
incredible story I want to say a huge
thank you he's a true national treasure
he said arise Sir Tom John McGuire BBC
News Bedford sure will be speaking to
the man himself really surely hero just
gonna have to carry on oh it's my
breakfast not anything else okay in the
last half-hour the Justice Secretary has
told this program he doesn't know if all
primary schools in England will reopen
two more pupils next month those
comments come as the government faces
increasing pressure from teaching unions
and councils over safety let's get some
detail from our political correspondent
Leila Nathan who as you can see is in
Westminster this morning good morning to
you I know you were listening carefully
into what the Justice Secretary was
saying and and schools remains the big
issue for many people watching this
morning morning Dan yeah I thought it
was an interesting interesting
acknowledgement from Robert Buckland
earlier on the program that actually the
picture on June the first in England is
likely to be patchy remember there is a
lot of opposition from certain councils
especially in the north of England from
education unions to to this date of June
the first some opposed entirely on
principle on safety grounds concerns
about the ability for classroom to
associate distance that the questions
about whether children are transmitters
of the disease and concerns about
whether a testing tracking and tracing
regime will be fully operational by then
those concerns have been outlined to the
government a growing number of councils
now and remember local authorities
govern most primary schools in England
so you know clearly some concerns now
but a recognition from the government
that yes they want to get schools back
on June the 1st that was a target
government saying it's important to have
set that target
they're saying look remember the impacts
on the welfare and the education of
children of course it will also allow
parents to get back to work but I think
interesting acknowledgment from Robert
Buckland that it's not likely to be the
same story across the country on June
the 1st have a listen to what he said it
really depends upon the view of
employers you know a lot of councils are
direct employers or teaching staff their
views are clearly very important and I'm
not going to sit here and pretend that
suddenly on the 1st of June everything
will be uniform I don't know it's my
hope but these conversations need to
continue and we need to listen very
carefully to the concerns of employers
and staff so I think it's gonna be
interesting come June the 1st remember
under a fortnight's away that we're
gonna have variation across the nations
of the UK Scotland Wales and Northern
Ireland not intending to have any
reopening of schools on that date but
now we're looking at having a lot of
regional variation across England as
well thank you very much really
interesting to see your assessment of
what the Justice Secretary was saying
this morning on BBC Breakfast he was
with us at 7:30 this morning thank you
the airplane engine manufacturer
rolls-royce has announced it is cutting
9,000 jobs worldwide company boss Warren
II said difficult decisions were needed
to see the business through the
coronavirus crisis as demand for air
travel Falls Rolls Royce employs over
23,000 people in the UK most of those
are at its Darby engine plant
consultations on job losses will start
today but the company hasn't given
details of how many roles are at risk
here three more people have been
arrested in connection with the death of
a student killed in a shooting in
Blackburn iya Hachem who was 19 was
walking to a supermarket on Sunday
afternoon when shots were fired from
passing car police don't believe she was
the intended target of that attack two
men aged 31 and 35 have been questioned
on suspicion of murder a 29 year old man
has been arrested on suspicion of
assisting an offender the law around
organ donation in England is changing
from today and most adults will
automatically be considered donors
unless they opt out it's estimated this
could
an extra 700 lives each year adults and
their families will still have a choice
about which organs they would like to
donate the new law brings England into
line with Wales where the system was
changed five years ago
Scotland's due to follow suit next
spring but an opt-in system remains in
Northern Ireland so those are some of
the main stories around on this
Wednesday morning
can I ask you to cast your mind back now
all the way to Good Friday which seems
like a long time ago but that was when
we first spoke to captain Tom Moore as
he was then on BBC Breakfast his plan
then was to try and raise 1,000 pounds
for the NHS it was a plan that started a
family barbecue by walking a hundred
laps of his garden before he turned 100
his ambition touched millions his story
was broadcast in homes around the world
and Tom raised a staggering thirty-two
million pounds with an extra six million
pounds donated through Gift Aid it's
crazy amounts of money isn't it and now
his achievements are being recognized
with an incredible honor a knighthood
the news came through at 10:30 last
night we've already spoken to some
members of his family let's speak now
this morning to the man himself who is
alongside his daughter Hannah captain
Sir Tom Moore good morning
congratulations how does it feel to be a
knight of the realm this morning so how
does it feel to be a knight of the realm
this morning unless it's rather
different men this honor is is so
outstanding that I really can't say how
different I feel but I certainly feel
that I've been given a very outstanding
order by the Queen and the prime
minister and as I thank them all very
much I'm certainly delighted and I'm
overruled by the fact that this has
happened to me and I understand it you
you knew because a letter arrived at
home when you first saw that letter what
did you think so a letter arrived and
when you first saw it or when I first
told you about
what did you think I thought this can't
be true
this this I've always said this won't
happen and now it appears it actually
have but I certainly was never
anticipating that that letter would
arrive for me I just I wanted an insight
into family life Anna because we're
speaking to you about this earlier we're
speaking to Georgie and Benji and your
grandchildren obviously and they were
saying they still call you grander but
they might have a little joke about
saluting you here and there now you are
sir as well so and they were talking to
Benjamin and Georgia earlier and saying
that joking that they'd have to call you
sir grandpa now what do you think the
day was it I don't think that that's
what they will be doing them it's a nice
thought but I'm sure they will do that I
know that the money that is raised is
going to help lots of people and we'll
talk about that in a minute and you're
also setting up a foundation tell us a
little bit about it so you're now
setting up you've now set up the
foundation can you talk about some of
the causes talk a little bit about that
one of the there were the reasons for
the yeah for that is that what you
really yes one of the things that
strikes me it is it really necessary
moment is for so many people I feel
throughout the world are feeling lonely
I think they are feeling so much very
much on their own which is rather a
shame because there is certainly a
bright future for everyone but I think
loneliness is something which we have
got to look at very carefully and and
Hannah I know this is a subjective issue
of loneliness that that sir Tom your dad
discuss with with his late wife as well
that's right so um can you recall when a
mother was very poorly and and she
talked to you yes when my wife was in in
home where he'd been for a long time and
she I used to go and see her everyday
without fail and one day she said to me
you know if you didn't come and see me I
would be very lonely that really has an
impact Hannah you know people hearing
that because at the moment as well it's
difficult for people to go and see
people who might be lonely so and
presumably that's a really kind of
personal thing for you and your family I
mean it really is I think that when you
think of all the people who's so
desperately isolated right now due to Co
vyd I'm not just here but around the
world and those people who are
desperately poorly with no one to be
able to visit them but the people who
are have have been alone in their houses
for weeks and weeks and weeks it has a
terrible impact on mental health and
well-being and it's something that's
very close to our hearts Hannah could
you can you ask your dad given that
conversation that he had with his late
wife and how important that clearly was
to her and to him how amazing it must
feel now to be able to raise all this
money which will then go to help people
who find themselves in that similar
situation yes so I'm recalling that
something so personal as a mother
feeling you know potentially lonely if
you hadn't been with her how does it
feel now to stop being able to raise
some money to help those people you are
feeling so desperately lonely I think I
feel inside I feel very very displeased
and delighted we can do something right
now because going back to term when my
wife was in hospital in the same place
there was lots of old people mainly
ladies and they've been there for ages
and ages and no one ever came to see
them here in year out
not a soul came to see them and I
thought how soul destroying it most
people was those people cause it wasn't
their fault but not a soul came to see
them it's heartbreaking isn't it to
listen to that and hopefully
so Tom a change that you can make with
this with this money and you've got a
lot to look forward to as well the
changes you'll be able to make to
people's lives because of this money and
also at some stage we're not sure
entirely when you'll actually get to
receive this honor hopefully from the
Queen herself what what is what sort of
surprise all that being what a day that
will be for you and the family so I'm
really looking forward to raising the
money with the new foundation for things
like loneliness but thinking about your
award your honor from the Queen how do
you feel about the eventual day when you
will be knighted by the Queen how do you
feel about that hope she's not very
heavy-handed with the sword so I hope
she isn't as well I'm sure she's very
accustomed to looking after people and
also Hannah ask your dad I'm not sure
how many guests he's allowed to take has
he chosen who they'll be yet I don't
know how many guests he can take so we
don't know how many guests you can take
yet do we we don't have any information
so they were saying who would you take
but we don't know how many people you
can take you won't see one week I mean I
might find a good one me i think
everybody's they seem to changed all the
rules for your dad anyway in terms of
giving out these knighthoods I know I
just wanted to put to you that point
that we mentioned earlier when we spoke
about an hour ago and see what your dad
thinks about this about about that
lovely message we had earlier that it's
never too late to make a difference and
here is your dad at ninety nine when he
started and now a hundred years old
bringing life and light to many people's
lives around the UK and around the world
and raising such an enormous amount of
money so you have inspired people around
the world and and really engendered in
everyone the feeling that it's never too
late to start something new and make a
difference and people around the world
are looking to you
what do you feel about that I think good
for you I mean the reduce there's a
future for everyone
and the surly with this room for
expansion in kindness throughout
everybody has some kind of somewhere
please expand your kindness to everyone
that you possibly can and one are you
going around will give everybody a
little smile and see if they'll smile
back this is something would not do a
lot of good little smart and see if you
can get a smile back again that's a very
good idea I know that Hannah and Sir Tom
you're gonna stay with us because we've
got a few special guests as always with
you
and so and we're gonna hear a little bit
about where the money is going to go to
now so let's talk to Ian lush who's
chairman of NHS charities together joins
us from North London I mean first of all
here it is a staggering amount of money
and where does it where where is it
gonna go so it's going to 240 charities
around the country or supporting NHS
trusts hospitals community trusts
ambulance trusts and the first tranche
of money has already gone out to support
frontline staff at this real time of
crisis and now we're planning for the
future so as well as improving staff
facilities we're also looking at the
legacy of Kovach 19 and the amazing
amount of money that sitamma has raised
and all the other fundraisers have
helped us with with enable us to plan
for helping staff we've had really
traumatic times over the last few months
and also looking at what happens next
the whole planning so it's already in
making a difference it's already made a
huge difference we've already got 20
million pounds to the frontline helping
staff also helping patients you
mentioned loneliness because there's all
these patients in hospital with Kovac 19
not able to see their loved ones have be
provided tablet devices for a loss of
them so that they can communicate with
their families virtually and that's made
a huge difference as well and so I mean
that you know the thing that's there's
so many things they're striking not only
as he touch people's hearts but I mean
actually really making a difference I
mean it you know it will go a long way
this money as well won't it yeah it goes
a huge way and the
is that it's it's broken every single
fundraising record there's ever been
he's a Guinness world record holder as
well as a knight of the realm and what's
happened is that it's tapped into the
public support at the NHS and it's
allowed us as NHS charities so as I say
there's 240 around the country to really
reach it to every part of the NHS and so
my charity ethereal health charity is
benefices charities in every part of the
UK so that's been really really exciting
in lush thank you so much
Gemma for NHS charities together thank
you well there you go Hannah I'm sure
you were listening in to that and
relaying that to your dad as well we've
got a few extra guests coming in a
moment but isn't it brilliant to hear
that that money millions of it is
already making a huge difference to
people working in the NHS on the front
line right now it's extraordinary I mean
who could have imagined a few weeks ago
that this could have such an impact and
help so many people we're just thrilled
it's just amazing to think about that
little walk has transformed people's
lives and so Tom I mean you know we've
talked to you all the way along but a
thousand pounds was what you wanted to
raise wasn't it so we've been talking to
the BBC since the very beginning and we
had the target of a thousand pounds only
so talk a little bit about that about
raising a thousand pounds and now being
at 33 million well I think it's
absolutely an amazing one we started I
did the first walk walk up down here and
I was going to give me a pound again and
again I never decided the price would be
better and we were the aim was everybody
you if you walk on will try and play it
was just a question of can you walk he
says you walk and we will pace and
that's how it started as I I had to walk
and walk and walk and I did it was with
a good pleasure and without any and any
hardship because he as we got on and on
the the funds got better and better and
it just went on and on it was absolutely
totally amazed
because not only was it in in this
country but it seemed to go throughout
the world
we got messages I don't know how many
come to handle and tell you how many
countries it must have been something
like a hundred countries Rankin what did
have a word was with me because of the
son mother was being raised and the fact
that wherever it was it seemed to raise
the spirits of so many different
countries which was absolutely amazing
and to me it was delightful it really
did and amongst all that you also had a
number one single so ever listen we've
got a few messages more for you now
because over the last few weeks you
developed that really special friendship
with Michael Ball which led to the
number one spot with fittingly you'll
never walk alone and Michael has a very
special message for you this morning Tom
it's Michael and I couldn't be more
thrilled I'm not surprised because if
anyone ever deserved a knighthood it was
you but I'm so thrilled for you and so
pleased and I cannot wait to see you to
be able to say sir Tom Moore my bloody
love you well done sir we love that
message the message is don't and there's
so many people offering congratulations
we know how much you love formula one so
Tom as well so just hold on a second
well and we're gonna hear from Lewis
Hamilton here we go
good morning Tom I hope you are well I
just wanted to send a huge
congratulations on this incredible honor
of being knighted it is so well deserved
what you have done in bringing together
a nation and inspiring so many and
helping those that really need it most
honestly I am in all of you and I just
wanted to send you love and positivity I
hope that you get to enjoy this moment
god bless you buddy take care lovely
message from Lewis Hamilton we've got
one more to play you as well so Tom but
I wanted to get your reaction entered to
Michael ballin and hearing from and I
know
who you admire as well Lewis Hamilton so
Michael sent you that message and then
Louis Hamilton so what's your messages
back to both of them thank you very much
absolutely overall by the fact speaking
up to people like you I mean Michael and
seem to be songsters mainly him I mean I
was maybe little bit in the background
and for Lewis Lewis you are one of my
heroes I'm so disappointed that knew you
not bill to race at the present time I
hope maybe before the end of the season
you'll be showing us how to sit on or
stand on the podium again
well maybe you can start with him that
would be nice wouldn't it I'm there also
we know a huge cricket fan even an
honorary member of the England team we
know and so Andrew Strauss um has some
advice for a fellow cricketer receiving
a night with knighthood here's his
message hi it's Andrew Strauss being
here I believe I was speaking on behalf
of the whole nation when I say a huge
congratulations to captain Tom for
receiving your knighthood today it is
richly deserved we are without doubt
going through extraordinary times as a
country and no one encapsulate that
willingness to meet the challenge
head-on and to ensure that something
good comes out this period more than
your yourself you have had an incredible
impact on this country over the last few
weeks and that is why you are so
deserving of this honor and so many
people are absolutely blown away by what
you've done thank you so much for that
Andrew Strauss and so some we've got
another surprise for you this morning
louise mentioned you loved your cricket
we also are joined live on BBC Breakfast
this morning by another knight of the
realm
Sir Ian both them is here now hopefully
we can make this technically work Sir
Ian lovely to have you on the show if
you would like to give a message to Sir
Tom live Hannah will be able to relay it
and hopefully you can have some sort of
conversation together so
good morning good morning good morning
yeah Tom and Hannah there we've had a
really hard time
there's last few weeks few months and
maybe more to come yet but I think one
thing that made us all get up in the
mornings and turn our television on was
to see how far you've gone and how much
you've raised an amazing effort and I
think in hard hard times
the country needs something like that to
inspire them so I think what you've
achieved is it goes way beyond the money
I think you look at every household
everybody knows who sir tom is now it's
been amazing and everybody in every
household knows who said tom is now but
he's life and so you can talk to him
very kind of you to say that good
I've got a new person to give me about a
lovely bat so I'll get it cleaned up and
remember older than maybe in some time I
can have a little batting officer to you
that'd be lovely did my pleasure on my
absolute pleasure and played cricket
since I resigned and retired and threw
everything away in 93 so yeah well I
know I don't think I've got about a
mouth to borrow yours he said he might
have to borrow your bat never mind
let's hope it won't be very long that
there soon you'll be out there on the
crease getting another century and maybe
a bit more doing that but you know I
think what you achieved is remarkable
and an inspiration to the whole country
and you know when you have situations
like this people need something to get
hold of and to jump on and enjoy and to
be honest even be part of it and I think
what you've done is an amazing feat and
done a little bit of walking myself but
not at 99 going on 100 I've got to get
there first
but oh all I can say is a remarkable
effort Tom and I'm very very proud of
you if anyone deserves
award and you do and I can assure you
Tom the Queen will be very gentle he can
assure you that the Queen er will be
very gentle when she places her sword to
reminder what you said would I would
hope that she listened to what you said
just to come back to you only you said
you're no stranger to a walk there
you've raised millions of pounds
yourself I'm sure you appreciate the
effort that's gone into your walks over
the years and to see the public interest
in watts or Tom managed to do to raise
such a vast amount of money but such a
simple idea simple but it took care
every morning you have to get up and you
have to do it and I can't believe how
difficult that would be at Tom's age so
forget what we did and you will young
and fit in those days but what tom has
achieved is it's an inspiration to a lot
of people out there there's a lot of
people get depressed in times like this
and a lot of people you know children in
the rooms and amount of children that
are now walking yeah we're doing a
virtual walk thing and children are
signing on to do it young children and I
think that's all through the inspiration
of the satsang and I think that the
praise that the words don't you count
there's too many things you can say that
a marvelous it's just an amazing effort
and one that I think makes the whole
country very proud serene both and thank
you very much for saying that to the
brand-new captain Sir Tom Moore this
morning really appreciate your time on
breakfast lovely to talk to you thank
you sir Ian and we're going to continue
this conversation during the second
world war captain - Tom served in Burma
and India and we can hear now about his
achievements
maybe inspiring future generations of
the Armed Forces were joined by
Lieutenant Colonel Richard Hall who
joins us from Harrogate morning to you
am i first of all you might want to pass
on your congratulations what would you
like to say to Sir Tom I do you
congratulations indeed we are as an
Armed Forces community genuinely
thrilled with the news this morning and
it's great to see how quickly this award
came about is a very popular choice as
we've heard this morning but
no sir Tom's unifying effect continues
not just from his fundraising but to be
recognized by the Prime Minister and
then the Queen in this way I'm sure
there are people wake up this morning
opening their newspapers and turning on
the news it's bringing a smile to their
face and they're just thinking yeah go
on boy keep going it's fantastic and has
he been an inspiration as well to those
in the Armed Forces
he absolutely has I mean I command the
Army Foundation College up here in
Harrogate so we've got 1,300 trainees
going through basic training at the
moment and he's been a genuine
inspiration to them they're at home
right now and serene was saying young
people taking on these challenges almost
mirroring what he's been doing I'm
hearing all sorts of stories about half
marathons and Burpee challenges I think
I think so Tom's probably having a as
much in effect as you know some of these
online fitness programs at the moment's
phenomenon he's the Joe Wiggs is you Joe
wicks of the nation and it just lets
pick up some of those thoughts as well
because I'm it's quite something to sort
of you know get the money donated it
goes to great charities but also
inspiring you know young people to get
out there and do unto other things and
how does Sir Tom feel about that so
obviously we're talking about great sums
of money and and what an inspiration
it's been but you have been inspiring
young people around the country and
around the world how do you feel about
that I think that don't as I said
because about my might be old but I'm
still a great advocate of young people
because they are our future they are
going to be a future generation and I'm
delighted to film them I'm showing to be
absolutely the top grade and I'm sure
that they can all do the same because it
is essential to the young people look
ahead and and realize that they have an
enormous future because really you are
the future of this country and Hannah
can ask you what the family have got
planned for today this all started with
a family
barbecue and a joke about doing a
hundred laps of the garden so how are
you celebrating on your own today once
all the cameras and all the
paraphernalia is gone yeah I think
that's a little bit of time before the
end but before we left our own devices
again and tell my schedule is quite busy
this morning and we're speaking to Dubai
and Russia and actually I can't remember
who else today but a few I think it will
be this afternoon when we have some time
to reflect but but we are in a wonderful
golden bubble of joy right now we really
are and just ask Tommy if you would what
would be his favourite tipple to
celebrate is it a cup of tea or what is
it what would be your favourite tipple
to celebrate with it be a cup of tea or
a gin or a whiskey or a champagne well
people keep asking about that I think
about I keep that a guarded secret
I find everybody decides to do the same
and that might cause trouble amongst the
the suppliers so think about when I was
a time in India one of the things that
we did have was called John Collins so
maybe I'll have the John Collins if you
know what was this just wonder whether
your dad's going to celebrate with a
walk today as you having the day off are
you gonna do any walking today are you
going to take a bit of time off no I
shall do I've done walking yesterday and
also do a bit bit today so I say if I
can walk and get rid of all the cameras
and things that are in the way colonel
and just one final question for you so
Tom and we will let ya promise me that
you go and get on with everything so one
final question to you what is your on
this beautiful sunny day on the day that
you've been given a knighthood what is
your final message to everybody who's
watching and been taking part in all of
this so it's our last question and when
you look to the camera and the British
public what's your final message to
everyone who's been so supportive and so
Jen
and so kind I'm saying thank you very
much to all of you all being so generous
and the cause the cause have been such a
good one but I really do thank you from
the bottom of my heart because you have
been absolutely outstanding never ever
did I anticipate that I should good so
it's kind of from so many people and
thank you all very very much
you're an amazing man captain so it's
almost more real pleasure to share a bit
of your morning with you have a great
day congratulations Hannah as ever
please pass on our thanks to the rest of
the family as well it's been lovely to
spend the morning with you thank you
it's always a pleasure thumbs up from
the new knight of the realm and what did
he say earlier give a little smile and
hopefully you'll get a little smile
that's a wonderful thing to take this
morning away with you thank you so much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News